---
layout: post
title: "Men and machines"
date: 2019-11-08 14:19:48 +0100
author: Ernst Gombrich
---


## source: b-ok.cc

![]({{site.baseurl}}/assets/a_little_history_of_the_world/cover.jpg) 

click on text to start



# MEN AND MACHINES


Mastering the mathematics of nature enabled people not only to
understand the forces of nature, but to use them. And
they were now harnessed and put to work for mankind.

The history of all the inventions that followed is not as simple as you
might think. In most cases they began with an idea. This idea led to
experiments and trials, after which it was often abandoned, only to be
picked up again later, perhaps by somebody else. It was only when a
person came along who had the determination and persistence to carry the
idea through to its conclusion, and make it generally useful, that that
person became known as the 'inventor'. This was the case with all the
machines which changed our lives -- with steam-driven machinery, the
steamship, the steam engine and the telegraph -- and they all became
important in Metternich's time.

![image]({{site.baseurl}}/assets/a_little_history_of_the_world/f0279-01.jpg)

# JAMES WATT'S STEAM ENGINE

The steam engine came first. A learned Frenchman called Papin had
already been carrying out experiments around 1700. But it wasn't until
1769 that a Scottish engineer named James Watt was able to patent a
proper steam engine. At first the engine was mainly used to pump water
out of mines, but people soon saw the possibility of using it to drive
carriages or ships. Experiments with steamships went on in England in
1802, and in 1803 an American engineer called Robert Fulton launched a
steamboat on the Seine. Commenting on the event, Napoleon wrote: 'This
project is capable of changing the face of the world.' Four years later,
in 1807, the first steamship made its way up the Hudson River from New
York to Albany, its huge paddle-wheel churning, with much puffing,
clanking and belching of smoke.

At about the same time attempts were also
being made in England to propel vehicles using steam. But it took until
1803 for a usable engine to be invented, one which ran on cast-iron
railway lines. In 1814 George Stephenson built the first effective steam
locomotive and named it Blücher after the great Prussian general, and in
1825 the first railway line was opened between the towns of Stockton and
Darlington. Within thirty years there were railway lines all over
Britain, America, throughout almost all of Europe, and even in India.
These lines went over mountains, through tunnels and over great rivers,
and carried people at least ten times as quickly as the fastest
stagecoach.

![image]({{site.baseurl}}/assets/a_little_history_of_the_world/f0280-01.jpg)

THE STEAM LOCOMOTIVE BLÜCHER

![image]({{site.baseurl}}/assets/a_little_history_of_the_world/f0281-01.jpg)

WITHIN THIRTY YEARS THERE WERE RAILWAY LINES ALL OVER BRITAIN

It was much the same with the invention of the electric telegraph, the
only means of rapid communication before the telephone. First thought of
in 1753, there were many attempts from the 1770s onwards, but only in
1837 did an American artist called Samuel Morse succeed in sending a
short telegraph to his friends. Once again, hardly more than ten years
had passed before use of the telegraph was widespread.


![image]({{site.baseurl}}/assets/a_little_history_of_the_world/f0281-02.jpg)

SAMUEL MORSE TELEGRAPH KEY

However, other machines changed the world even more profoundly. These
were the machines which made use of the forces of nature instead of
manpower. Take spinning and weaving, for example -- work that had always
been done by artisans. When the demand for cloth increased (around the
time of Louis XIV), factories already existed, but the work was done by
hand. It took a while for people to realise that their new knowledge of
nature could be applied to the production of cloth. The dates are much
the same as those of the other great inventions. People were
experimenting with various sorts of spinning machines from 1740 onwards.
The mechanical loom was introduced at about the same time. And again, it
was in England that these machines were first made and used. Machines
and factories needed coal and iron, so countries which had their own
coal and iron were at a great advantage.

All of these developments produced a tremendous upheaval in people's
lives. Everything was turned upside-down and hardly anything stayed
where it had been. Think for a moment how secure and orderly everything
had been in the guilds of the medieval cities! Those guilds had lasted
right up until the time of the French Revolution and longer. True, it
was no longer as easy for a journeyman to become a master as it had been
in the Middle Ages, but it was still possible and the hope was there. Now, all of a
sudden, everything changed. Some people owned machines. It didn't take
much training to learn how to operate them -- just a couple of hours and
then they ran themselves. This meant that anyone who owned a mechanical
loom could, with the help of one or two assistants -- perhaps his wife
and children -- do more work than a hundred trained weavers. So whatever
became of all the weavers in a town into which a mechanical loom was
introduced? The answer is that they woke up one day to discover that
they weren't needed any more. Everything it had taken them years to
learn, first as apprentices and then as journeymen, was useless.
Machines were faster, better and very much cheaper. Machines don't sleep
and they don't eat. Nor do they need holidays. Thanks to the new
machines, the money that had allowed a hundred weavers to live safely
and comfortably could now be saved by the factory owner, or spent on
himself. Of course, he still needed workers to manage the machines. But
only unskilled workers, and not many of them.


![image]({{site.baseurl}}/assets/a_little_history_of_the_world/f0282-01.jpg)

MECHANICAL LOOMS


But the worst thing was this: the city's hundred weavers were now out of
work and would starve, because one machine was doing their work for
them. And naturally, rather than see his family starve a person will do
anything. Even work for a pittance as long as it means he has a job to
keep body and soul together. So the factory owner, with his machines,
could summon the hundred starving weavers and say: 'I need five people
to run my factory and look after my machines. What will you charge for
that?' One of them might say: 'I want so much, if I am to live as
comfortably as I did before.' The next would say: 'I just need enough
for a loaf of bread and a kilo of potatoes a day.' And the third, seeing
his last chance of survival about to disappear, would say: 'I'll see if
I can manage on half a loaf.' Four others then said: 'So will we!'
'Right!' said the factory owner. 'I'll take you five. How many hours can
you work in a day?' 'Ten hours,' said the first. 'Twelve,' said the
second, seeing the job slipping from his grasp. 'I can do sixteen,'
cried the third, for his life depended on it. 'Fine,' said the factory
owner, 'I'll take you. But who'll look after my machine while you're
asleep? My machine doesn't sleep!' 'I'll get my little brother to do it
-- he's eight years old,' replied the luckless weaver. 'And what shall I
give him?' 'A few pennies will do, to buy him a bit of bread and
butter.' And even then the factory owner might reply: 'He can have the
bread, but we'll see about the butter.' And this was how business was
done. The remaining ninety-five weavers were left to starve, or find
another factory owner prepared to take them on.

Now you mustn't think that all factory owners were as vile as the one I
have just described. But the worst of them, who paid the least and sold
at the lowest prices, could be the most successful. Then others, against
their conscience and their natural instincts, often found themselves
treating their workers in the same way.

People began to despair. Why bother to learn a skill and take pains to
make beautiful things by hand? Machines could do the same job a hundred
times more quickly, often more neatly and at a hundredth of the price.
And so weavers, blacksmiths, spinners and cabinet-makers sank ever-more
deeply into misery and destitution, running from factory to factory in
the hope of earning a few pennies. Many of them raged against the
machines that had robbed them of their happiness. They broke into
factories and wrecked the looms, but it made no difference. In England
in 1812 the death penalty was introduced for anyone found guilty of
destroying a machine. And then newer and better machines followed that
could do the work, not of a hundred, but of five hundred workers, and
the general misery increased.

![image]({{site.baseurl}}{{site.baseurl}}/assets/a_little_history_of_the_world/f0284-01.jpg)

FACTORY AT NIGHT
